# The Scamp as Ideal

To me, spiritually, a child of the East and the West, man's dignity consists in
the following facts which distinguish man from animals. First, that he has a
playful curiosity and a natural genius for exploring knowledge; Second, that he
has dreams and a lofty idealism (often vague, or confused, or cocky, it is true,
but nevertheless worthwhile); third, and still more important, that he is able
to correct his dreams by a sense of humor, and thus remain his idealism by a
more robust and healthy realism; and finally, that he does not react to
surroundings mechanically and uniformly as animals do, but possesses the ability
and the freedom to determine his own reactions and to change surroundings at his
will. This last is the same as saying that human personality is the last thing
to be reduced to mechanical laws; somehow the human mind is forever elusive,
uncatchable and unpredictable, and manages to wriggle out of mechanistic laws or
a materialistic dialectic that crazy psychologists and unmarried economists are
trying to impose upon him. Man, therefore, is a curious, dreamy, humorous and
wayward, creature.

In short, my faith in human dignity consists in the belief that man is the
greatest scamp on earth. Human dignity must be associated with the idea of a
scamp and not with that of an obedient, disciplined and regimented soldier. The
scamp is probably the most glorious type of human being, as the soldier is the
lowest type, according to this conception. It seems in my last book, ***My
Country and My People***, the net impression of readers was that I was trying to
glorify the "old rogue". It is my hope that the net impression of the present
one will be that I am doing my best to glorify the scamp or vagabond. I hope I
shall succeed. For things are not so simple as they sometimes seem. In this
present age of threats to democracy and individual liberty, probably only the
scamp and the spirit of the scamp alone will save us from becoming lost as
serially numbered units in the masses of disciplined, obedient, regimented and
uniformed coolies. The scamp will be the last and the most formidable enemy of
dictatorships. He will be the champion of human dignity and individual freedom,
and will be the last to be conquered. All modern civilization depends entirely
upon him.

Probably the Creator knew well that, when He created man upon this earth, He was
producing a scamp, a brilliant  scamp, it is true, but a scamp nonetheless. The
scamp like qualities of man are, after all, his most hopeful qualities. This
scamp that the Creator has produced is undoubtedly a brilliant chap. He is still
a very unruly and awkward adolescent, thinking himself greater and wiser than he
really is, still full of mischief and naughtiness and love of a free-for-all.
Nevertheless, there is so much good in him that the Creator might still be
willing to pin him His hopes, as a father sometimes pins his hopes on a
brilliant but somewhat erratic son of twenty. Would He be willing some day to
retire and turn over the management of this universe to this erratic son of His?
I wonder....

Speaking as a Chinese, I do not think that any civilization can be called
complete until it has progressed from sophistication to unsophistication, and
made a conscious return to simplicity of thinking and living, and I call no man
wise until he has made the progress from the wisdom of knowledge to the wisdom
of foolishness, and become a laughing philosopher, feeling first life's tragedy
and then life's comedy. For we must weep before we can laugh. Out of sadness
comes the awakening and out of the awakening comes the laughter of the
philosopher, with kindliness and tolerance to boot.

The world, I believe, is far too serious, and being far too serious, it has need
of a wise and merry philosophy. The philosophy of the Chinese art of living can
be certainly be called the "gay science", if anything can be called by that
phrase used by Nietzsche. After all, only a gay philosophy is profound
philosophy; the serious philosophies of the West haven't even begun to
understand what life is. To me personally, the only function of philosophy is to
teach us to take life more lightly and gayly than the average business man does,
for no business man who does not retire at fifty, if he can, is in my eyes a
philosopher. This is not merely a casual thought, but is a fundamental point of
view with me. The world can be made a more peaceful and more reasonable place to
live in only when men have imbued themselves in the light gayety of this spirit.
The modern man takes life far too seriously, and because he is too serious, the
world is full of troubles. We ought, therefore, to take time to examine the
origin of that attitude which will make possible a whole hearted enjoyment of
this life and a more reasonable, more peaceful and less hot headed temperament.

I am perhaps entitled to call this the philosophy of the Chinese people rather
than of any one school. It is a philosophy that is greater than Confusius and
greater than Laotse, for it transcends these and other ancient philosophers; it
draws from these fountain springs of thought amd harmonizes them into a whole,
and from the abstract outlines of their wisdom, it has created an art of living
in the flesh, visible, palpable and understandable by the common man. Surveying
Chinese literature, art and philosophy of a wise disenchantment and a hearty
enjoyment of life is their common message and teaching the most constant, most
characteristic and most persistent refrain of Chinese thought.

[Next: 03 - Christian, Geek, and Chinese &rarr;](https://github.com/thaicuc/the-importance-of-living/blob/master/03-christian-greek-and-chinese.md)
