# Christian, Greek, and Chinese

There are several views of mankind, the traditional Christian theological view,
the Greek pagan view, and the Chinese Taoist Confucianist view. (I do not
include the Buddhist view because it is too sad.) Deeper down in their
allegorical sense, these views after all do not differ so much from one another,
especially when the modern man with better bioligical and anthropological
knowledge gives them a broader interpretation. But these differences in their
original forms exist.

The traditional, orthodox Christian view was that man was created perfect,
innocent, foolish and happy, living naked in the Garden of Eden. Then came
knowledge and wisdom and the Fall of Man, to which the sufferings of man are
due, notably work by the sweat of one's brow for man, and the pangs of labor for
women. In contrast with man's original innocence and perfection, a new element
was introduced to explain his present imperfection, and that is of course the
Devil, working chiefly through the body, while his higher nature works through
the soul. When the "soul" was invented in the history of Chistian theology I am
not aware, but this "soul"  became a something rather than a function, an entity
rather than a condition, and it sharply separated man from the animals, which
have no souls worth saving. Here the logic halts, for the origin of the Devil
had to be explained, and when the medieval theologians proceeded with their
usual scholastic logic to deal with the problem, they got into a quandary. They
could not have very well admitted that the Devil, who was Not-God, came from God
himself, nor could they quite agree that in the original universe, the Devil, a
Not-God, was co-eternal with God. So in desperation they agreed that the Devil
must have been a fallen angel, which rather begs the question of the origin of
evil (for there still must have been another Devil to tempt this fallen angel),
and which is therefore unsatisfactory, but they had to leave it at that.
Nevertheless from all this followed the curious dichotomy of the spirit and the
flesh, a mythical conception which is still quite prevalent and powerful today
in affecting our philosophy of life and happiness.

Then came the Redemption, still borrowing from the current conception of the
sacrificial lamb, which went still farther back to the idea of a God who desired
the smell of roast meat and could not forgive for nothing. From this redemption,
at one stroke a means was found by which all sins could be forgiven, and a way
was found for perfection again. The most curious aspect of Christian thought is
the idea of perfection. As this happened during the decay of the ancient worlds,
a tendency grew up to emphasize the afterlife, and the question of salvation
supplanted the question of happiness or simple living itself. The notion was how
to get away from this world alive, a world which was apparently sinking into
corruption and chaos and doomed. Hence the overwhelming importance attached to
immortality. This represents a contradiction of the original Genesis story that
God did not want man to live forever. The Genesis story of the reason why Adam
and Eve were driven out of the Garden of Eden was not that they had tasted of
the Tree of Knowledge, as is popularly conceived, but the fear lest they should
disobey a second time and eat of the Tree of Life and live forever.

The Tree of Knowledge seemed to be somewhere in the center of the garden, but
the Tree of Life was near the eastern entrance, where for all we know, cherubims
are still stationed to guard the approach by men.

All in all, there is still a belief in total depravity, that enjoyment of this
life is sin and wickedness, that to be uncomfortable is to be virtuous, and that
on the whole man cannot save himself except by a greater power outside. The
doctrine of sin is still the basic assumption of Christianity as generally
practiced today, and Christian missionaries trying to make converts generally
start out by impressing upon the party to be converted a consciousness of sin
and of the wickedness of human nature (which is, of course, the sine qua non for
the need of the ready made remedy which the missionary has up his sleeve). All
in all, you can't make a man a Christian unless you first make him believe he is
a sinner. Someone has said rather cruelly, "Religion in our country has so
narrowed down to the contemplation of sin that a respectable man does not any
longer dare to show his face in the church."

The Greek pagan world was a different world by itself and therefore their
conception of man was also quite different. What strikes me the most is that the
Greeks made their gods like men, while the Christians desired to make men like
the gods. That Olympian company is certainly a jovial, amorous, loving, lying,
quarreling and vow breaking, petulant lot; hunt loving, chariot riding and
javelin throwing like the Greeks themselves, a marrying lot, too, and having
unbelievably many illegitimate children. So far as the difference between Gods
and men is concerned, the gods merely had divine powers of hurling thunderbolts
in heaven and raising vegetation on earth, were immortal, and drank nectar
instead of wine, the fruit were pretty much the same. One feels one can be
intimate with this crowd, can go hunting with a knapsack on one's back with
Apollo or Athene, or stop Mercury on the way and chat with him as with a Western
Union messenger boy, and if the conversation gets too interesting, we can
imagine Mercury saying, "Yeah. Okay. Sorry, but I'll have to run along and
deliver this message at 72nd Street." The Greek men were not divine, but the
Greek gods were human. How different from the perfect Christian God! And so the
gods were merely another race of men, a race of giants, gifted with immortality,
while men on earth were not. Out of this background came some of the most
inexpressibly beautiful stories of Demeter and Proserpina and Orpheus. The
belief in the gods was taken for granted, for even Socrates, when he was about
to drink hemlock, proposed a libation to the gods to speed him on his journey
from this world to the next. This was very much like the attitude of Confucius.
It was necessarily so in that period; what attitude toward man and God the Greek
spirit would take in the modern world there is unfortunately no chance of
knowing. The Greek pagan world was not modern, and the modern Christian world is
not Greek. That's the pity of it.

On the whole, it was accepted by the Greeks that man's was a mortal lot, subject
sometimes to a cruel Fate. That once accepted, man was quite happy as he was,
for the Greeks loved this life and this universe, and were interested in
understanding the truth and the beauty of life, besides being fully occupied in
scientifically understanding the physical world. There was no mythical "Golden
Period" in the sense of the Garden of Eden, and no allegory of the Fall of Man;
the Hellenes themselves were but human creatures transformed from pebbles picked
up and thrown over their shoulders by Deucalion and his wife Pyrrha, as they
were coming down to the plain after the Great Flood. Diseases and cares were
explained comically; they came through the uncontrollable desire of a young
woman to open and see a box of jewels, Pandora's Box. The Greek fancy was
beautiful. They took human nature largely as it was: the Christians might say
they were "resigned" to the mortal lot. But it was so beautiful to be mortal:
there was free room for the exercise of understanding and the free, speculative
spirit. Some of the Sophists thought man's nature good, and some thought man's
nature bad, but there wasn't the sharp contradiction of Hobbes and Rousse.
Finally, in Plato, man was seen to be a compound of desires, emotions, and
thought, and ideal human life was the living together in harmony of these three
parts of his being under guidance of wisdom or true understanding. Plato thought
"ideas" were immortal, but individual souls were either base or noble, according
as they loved justice, learning, temperance and beauty or not. The soul also
acquired an independent and immortal existence in Socrates; as we are told in
"Phaedo", "When the soul exists in herself, and is released from the body, and
the body is released from the soul, what is this but death?" Evidently the
belief in immortality of the human soul is something which the Christian, Greek,
Taoist and Confucianist views have in common. Of course this is nothing to be
jumped at by modern believers in the immortality of the soul. Socrates' belief
in immortality would probably mean nothing to a modern man, because many of his
premises in support of it, like re-incarnation, cannot be accepted by the modern
man.

The Chinese view of man also arrived at the idea that man is the Lord of the
Creation (Spirit of the Ten Thousand Things), and in the Confucianist view, man
ranks as the equal of heaven and earth in the "Trio of Geniuses". The background
was animistic: everything was alive or inhabited by a spirit, mountains, rivers,
and everything that reached a grand old age. The winds and thunder were spirits
themselves; each of the great mountains and each river was ruled by a spirit who
practically owned it; each kind of flower had a fairy in heaven attending to its
seasons and its welfare, and there was a Queen of All Flowers whose birthday
came on the twelfth day of the second moon; every willow tree pine tree,
cypress, fox or turtle that reached a grand old age, say over a few hundred
years, acquired by that very fact immortality and became a "genius".

With this animistic background, it is natural that man is also considered a
manifestation of the spirit. The spirit, like all life in the entire universe,
is produced by the union of the male, active, positive or yang principle, and
the female, passive, negative or yin principle, which is really no more than a
lucky, shrewd guess at positive and negative electricity. When this spirit
becomes incarnated in a human body, it is called ***p'o***; when detached from a
body and floating about as spirit it is called ***hwen***. A man of forceful
personality or "spirits" is spoken of as having a lot of ***p'oli***, or
***p'o*** energy. After death, the ***hwen*** continues to wander about.
Normally it does not bother people, but if no one buries and offers sacrifices
to the deceased, the spirit becomes a "wandering ghost", for which reason an All
Souls' Day is set apart on the fifteenth day of the seventh moon for a general
sacrifice to those drowned in water or dead and unburied in a strange land.
Also, if the deceased was murdered or died suffering a wrong, the sense of
injustice in the ghost compels it to hang about and cause trouble until the
wrong is avenged and the spirit is satisfied. Then all trouble is stopped.

While living, man, who is spirit taking shape in a body, necessarily has certain
passions, desires, and a flow of "vital energy", or in more easily understood
English, just "nervous energy". In and for themselves, these are neither good or
bad, but just something given and inseparable from the characteristically human
life. All men and women have passions, natural desires and noble ambitions, and
also a conscience; they have sex, hunger, fear, anger, and are subject to
sickness, pain, suffering and death. Culture consists in bringing about the
expression of these passions and desires in harmony. That is the Confucianist
view, which believes that by living in harmony with this human nature given us,
we can become the equals of heaven and earth, as quoted at the end of Chapter
VI. The Buddhists, however, regard the mortal desires of the flesh essentially
as the medieval Christians did, they are nuisance to be done away with. Men and
women who are too intelligent, or inclined to think too much, sometimes accept
this view and become monks and nuns; but on the whole, Confucian good sense
forbids it. Then also, with a Taoistic touch, beautiful and talented girls
suffering a harsh fate are regarded as "fallen fairies", punished for having
mortal thoughts or some neglect of duty in heaven and sent down to this earth to
live through a predestined fate of mortal sufferings.

Man's intellect is considered as a flow of energy. Literally this intellect is
"spirit of a genius", ***chingshen***, the word "genius" being essentially taken
in the sense in which we speak of fox genii, rock genii and pine genii. The
nearest English equivalent is, as I have suggested, "vitality" or "nervous
energy", which ebbs and flows at different times of the day and of the person's
life. Every man born into this world starts out with certain passions and
desires and this vital energy, which run their course in different cycles
through childhood, youth, maturity, old age and death. Confucius said, "When
young, beware of fighting; when strong, beware of sex, when old, beware of
possession", which simply means that a boy loves fighting, a young man loves
women, and an old man loves money.

Faced with this compound of physical, mental and moral assets, the Chinese takes
an attitude toward man himself, as toward all other problems, which may be
summed up in the phrase: "Let us be reasonable". This is an attitude of
expecting neither too much nor too little. Man is, as it were, sandwiched
between heaven and earth, between idealism and realism, between lofty thoughts
and the baser passions. Being so sandwiched is the very essence of humanity; it
is human to have thirst for knowledge and thirst for water, to love a good idea
and a good dish of pork with bamboo shoots, and to admire a beautiful saying and
a beautiful woman. This being the case, our world is necessarily an imperfect
world. Of course there is a chance of taking human society in hand and making it
better, but the Chinese do not expect either perfect peace or perfect happiness.
There is a story illustrating this point of view. There was a man who was in
Hell and about to be re-incarnated, and he said to the King of Re-incarnation,
"If you want me to return to the earth as a human being, I will go only on my
own conditions." ... "And what are they?" asked the King. The man replied, "I
must be born the son of a cabinet minister and father of a future literary
wrangler (the scholar who comes out first at the national examinations). I must
have ten thousand acres of land surrounding my home and fish ponds and fruits of
every kind and a beautiful wife and pretty concubines, all good and loving to
me, and rooms stocked to the ceiling with gold and pearls and cellars stocked
full of grain and trunks chockful of money, and I myself must be a Grand
Councilor or a Duke of the First Rank and enjoy honor and prosperity and live
until I am a hundred years old." And the King of Re-incarnation replied, "If
there was such a lot on earth, I would go and be re-incarnated myself, and not
give it to you!"

The reasonable attitude is, since we've got this human nature, let's start with
it. Besides, there is no escaping from it anyway. Passions and instincts are
originally good or originally bad, but there is not much use talking about them,
is there? On the other hand, there is the danger of our being enslaved by them.
Just stay in the middle of the road. This reasonable attitude creates such a
forgiving kind of philosophy that, at least to a cultured, broad minded scholar
who lives according to the spirit of reasonableness, any human error or
misbehavior whatsoever, legal or moral or political, which can be labeled as
"common human nature" (more literally, "man's normal passions"), is excusable.
The Chinese go so far as to assume that Heaven or God Himself is quite a
reasonable being, that if you live reasonably, according to your best lights,
you have nothing to fear, that peace of conscience is the greatest of all gifts,
and that a man with a clear conscience need not be afraid even of ghosts. With a
reasonable God supervising the affairs of reasonable and some unreasonable
beings, everything is quite all right in this world. Eventually, both in Taoism
and in Confucianism, the conclusion and highest goal of this philosophy is
complete understanding of and harmony with nature, resulting in what I may call
"reasonable naturalism", if we must have a term for classification. A reasonable
naturalist then settles down to this life with a sort of animal satisfaction. As
Chinese illiterate women put it, "Other gave birth to us and we give birth to
others. What else are we to do?"

[Next: 04 - Earth Bound &rarr;](https://github.com/thaicuc/the-importance-of-living/blob/master/04-earth-bound.md)
