# Earth Bound

The situation then is this: man wants to live, but he still must live upon this
earth. All questions of living in heaven must be brushed aside. Let not the
spirit take wings and soar to the adobe of the gods and forget the earth. Are we
not mortals, condemned to die? The span of life vouchsafed us, threescore and
ten, is short enough, if the spirit gets too haughty and wants to live forever,
but on the other hand, it is also long enough, if the spirit is a little humble.
One can learn such a lot and enjoy such a lot in seventy years, and three
generations is a long, long time to see human follies and acquire human wisdom.
Anyone who is wise and has lived long enough to witness the changes of fashion
and morals and politics through the rise and fall of three generations should be
perfectly satisfied to rise from his seat and go away saying, "It was a good
show", when the curtain falls.

For we are of the earth, earth born and earth bound. There is nothing to be
unhappy about the fact that we are, as it were, delivered upon this beautiful
earth as its transient guests. Even if it were a dark dungeon, we still would
have to make the best of it; it would be ungrateful of us not to do so when we
have, instead of a dungeon, such a beautiful earth to live on for a good part of
a century. Sometimes we get too ambitious and disdain the humble and yet
generous earth. Yet a sentiment for this Mother Earth, a feeling of true
affection and attachment, one must have for this temporary adobe of our body and
spirit, if we are to have a sense of spiritual harmony.

We have to have, therefore, a kind of animal skepticism as well as animal faith,
taking this earthly life largely as it is. And we have to retain the wholeness
of nature that we see in Thoreau who felt himself kin to the sod and partook
largely of its dull patience, in winter expecting the sun of spring, who in his
cheapest moments was apt to think that it was not his business to be "seeking
the spirit", but as much the spirit's business to seek him, and whose happiness,
as he described it, was a good deal like that of the wood chucks. The earth,
after all is real, as the heaven is unreal: how fortunate is man that he is born
between the real earth and unreal heaven!

Any good practical philosophy must start out with the recognition of our having
a body. It is high time that some among us made the straight admission that we
are animals, an admission which is inevitable since the establishment of the
basic truth of the Darwinian theory and the great progress of biology,
especially biochemistry. It was very unfortunate that our teachers and
philosophers belonged to the so called intellectual class, with a characteristic
professional pride of intellect. The men of the spirit were as proud of the
spirit as the shoemaker is proud of leather. Sometimes even the spirit was not
sufficiently remote and abstract and they had to use the words, "essence" or
"soul" or "idea", writing them with capital letters to frighten us. The human
body was distilled in this scholastic machine into a spirit, and the spirit was
further concentrated into a kind of essence, forgetting that even alcoholic
drinks must have a "body" mixed with plain water if they are to be palatable at
all. And we poor laymen were supposed to drink that concentrated quintessence of
spirit. This over emphasis on the spirit was fatal. It made us war with our
natural instincts, and my chief criticism is that it made us war with our
natural instincts, and my chief criticism is that it made a whole and rounded
view of human nature impossible. It proceeded also from an inadequate knowledge
of biology and psychology, and of the place of the senses, emotions and, above
all, instincts in our life. Man is made of flesh and spirit both, and it should
be philosophy's business to see that the mind and body live harmoniously
together, that there be a reconciliation between the two.
