# The Monkey Epic

But if this biological view helps us to appreciate the beauty and rhythm of
life, it also shows our ludicrous limitations. By presenting to us a more
correct picture of what we are as animals, it enables us to better understand
ourselves and the progress of human affairs. A more generous sympathy, or even
tolerant cynicism, comes with a truer and deeper understanding of human nature
which has its roots in our animal ancestry. Gently reminding ourselves that we
are children of the Neanderthal or the Peking man, and further back still of the
anthropoid ages, we eventually achieve the capacity of laughing at our sins and
limitations, as well as admiring our monkey cleverness, which we call a sense of
human comedy. This is a beautiful thought suggested by the enlightening essay of
Clarence Day, This ***Mimian*** World. Reading that essay of Day's, we can
forgive all our fellowmen, the censors, publicity chiefs, dictators, economic
experts, delegates to international conferences and all the busybodies who try
to interfere with other people's lives. We can forgive them because we begin to
understand them.

In this sense, I come more and more to appreciate the wisdom and insight of the
great Chinese monkey epic, ***Hsiyuchi***. The progress of human history can be
better understood from this point of view; it is so similar to pilgrimage of
those imperfect, semi-human creatures to the Western Heaven, the monkey Wuk'ung
representing the human intellect, the Pig Pachich representing our lower nature,
Monk Sand representing common sense, and the Abbot Hsuantsang representing
wisdom and the Holy Way. The Abbot, protected by this curious escort, was
engaged upon a journey from China to India to procure sacred Buddhist books. The
story of human progress is essentially like the pilgrimage of this variegated
company of highly imperfect creatures, continually landing in dangers and
ludicrous situations through their own folly and mischief. How often the Abbot
has to correct and chastise the mischievous Monkey and the sensuous Pig, forever
led by their sadly imperfect minds and their lower passions into all sorts of
scrapes! The instincts of human frailty, of anger, revenge, impetuousness,
sensuality, forever crop up during this pilgrimage of mankind toward sainthood.
The increase of destructiveness goes side by side with the increase of human
skill, for like the Monkey with magical powers, we are able today to walk upon
the clouds and turn somersaults in the air (which is called "looping-the-loop"
in modern terms), to pull monkey hair out of our monkey legs and transform them
into little monkeys to harass our enemy, to knock at very gates of Heaven, brush
the Heavenly Gate Keeper brusquely aside and demand a place in the company of
the gods.

The Monkey was clever, but he was also conceited; he had enough monkey magic to
push his way into Heaven, but he had not enough sanity and balance and
temperance of spirit to live peacefully there. Too good perhaps for this earth
and its mortal existence, he was yet not good enough for Heaven and the company
of the immortals. There was something raw and mischievous and rebellious in him,
some dregs unpurged in his gold, and that was why when he entered Heaven he
created a terrific scare there, like a wild lion let loose from a menagerie cage
in the streets of a city, in the preliminary episode before he joined the
pilgrims' party. Through his inborn incorrigible mischief, he spoiled the Annual
Dinner Party given by the Western Queen Mother of Heaven to all the gods,
saints, and immortals of Heaven. Enraged that he was not invited to the party,
he posed as a messenger of God and sent the Bare-Footed Fairy on his way to the
feast in a wrong direction by telling him that the place of the party had been
changed, and then transformed himself into the shape of the Bare-Footed Fairy
and went to the feast himself. Quite a number of other fairies had been misled
by him in this way. Then entering the courtyard, he saw he was the first
arrival. Nobody was there except the servants guarding the jars of fairy wine in
the corridor. He then transformed himself into a sleeping sickness insect and
stung the servants into sleep and drunk the jars of wine. Half intoxicated, he
tumbled into the hall and ate up the celestial peaches laid out at table. When
the guests arrived and saw the despoiled dinner, he was already off for some
other exploits at the home of Laotse, trying to eat his pills of immortality.
Finally, still in disguise, he left Heaven, partly afraid of the consequences of
his drunken exploits, but chiefly disgusted because he had not been invited to
the Annual Dinner. He returned to his Monkey Kingdom where he was the king and
told the little monkeys so, and set up a banner of rebellion against Heaven,
writing on it the words "The Great Sage, Equal to Heaven". There followed then
terrific combats between this Monkey and the heavenly warriors, in which the
Monkey was not captured until the Goddess of Mercy knocked him down with a
gentle sprig of flowers from the clouds.

So, like the Monkey, forever we rebel and there will be no peace and humility in
us until we are vanquished by the Goddess of Mercy, whose gentle flowers dropped
from Heaven will knock us off our feet. And we shall not learn the lesson of
true humility until science has realized the limit of humans intellect. For in
the epic, the Monkey still rebelled even after his capture and demanded of the
Jade Emperor in Heaven why he was not given a higher title among the gods, and
he had to learn the lesson of humility by an ultimate bet with Buddha or God
Himself. He made a bet that with his magical powers he could go as far as the
end of the earth, and the stake was the title of "The Great Sage, Equal of
Heaven", or else complete submission. Then he leaped into the air, and traveled
with lightning speed across the continents until he came to a mountain with five
peaks, which he thought must be as far as mortal beings had ever set foot. In
order to leave a record of his having reached the place, he passed some monkey
urine at the foot of the middle peak, and having satisfied himself with this
feat, he came back and told Buddha about his journey. Buddha then opened one
hand and asked him to smell his own urine at the base of the middle finger, and
told him how all this time he had never felt the palm. It was only then that the
Monkey acquired humility, and after being chained to a rock for five hundred
years, was freed by the Abbot and joined him in his pilgrimage.

After all, this Monkey, which is an image of ourselves, is an extremely lovable
creature, in spite of his conceit and his mischief. So should we, too, be able
to love humanity in spite of all its weaknesses and shortcomings.

[Next: 08 - In the Image of the Monkey &rarr;](https://github.com/thaicuc/the-importance-of-living/blob/master/08-in-the-image-of-the-monkey.md)
