# In the Image of the Monkey

So then, instead of holding on to the Biblical view that we are made in the
image of God, we come to realize that we are made in the image of the monkey,
and that we are as far removed from the perfect God, as, let us say, the ants
are removed from ourselves. We are very clever, we are quite sure of that; we
are often a little cocky about our cleverness, because we have a mind. But the
biologist comes in to tell us that the mind after all is a very late
development, as far as articulate thinking is concerned, and that among the
things which go into the make-up of our moral fiber, we have besides the mind a
set of animal or savage instincts, which are much more powerful and are in fact
the explanation why we misbehave individually and in our group life. We are the
better able to understand the nature of that human mind of which we are so
proud. We see in the first place that, besides being a comparatively clever
mind, it is also an inadequate mind. The evolution of the human skull shows us
that it is nothing but an enlargement of one of the spinal vertebrae and that
therefore its function, like that of the spinal cord, is essentially that of
sensing danger, meeting the external environment and preserving life (not
thinking). Thinking is generally very poorly done. Lord Balfour ought to go down
to posterity on the strength of his one saying that "the human brain is as much
an organ for seeking food as the pig's snout". I do not call this real cynicism,
I call it merely a generous understanding of ourselves.

When man creates a civilization of his own, he embarks upon a course of
development that biologically might terrify the Creator Himself. So far as
adaptation to nature is concerned, all nature's creatures are marvelously
perfect, for those that are not perfectly adapted she kills off. But now we are
no longer called upon to adapt ourselves to nature; we are called upon to adapt
ourselves to ourselves, to this thing called civilization. All instincts were
good, were healthy in nature; in society, however, we call all instincts savage.
Every mouse steals and he is not the less moral or more immoral for stealing,
every dog barks, every cat doesn't come home at night and tears everything it
can lay its paws upon, every lion kills, every horse runs away from the sight of
danger, every tortoise sleeps the best hours of the day away, and every insect,
reptile, bird and beast reproduces its kind in public. Now in terms of
civilization, every mouse is a thief, every dog makes too much noise, every cat
is an unfaithful husband, when he is not savage little vandal, every lion or
tiger is a murderer, every horse a coward, every tortoise a lazy louse, and
finally, every insect, reptile, bird and beast is obscene when he performs his
natural vital functions. What a wholesale transformation of values! And that is
the reason why we sit back and wonder how the Lord made us so imperfect.

[Next: 09 - On Being Mortal &rarr;](https://github.com/thaicuc/the-importance-of-living/blob/master/09-on-being-mortal.md)
