# Preface

This is a personal testimony, a testimony of my own experience of thought and
life. It is not intended to be objective and makes no claim to establish eternal
truths. In fact I rather despise claims to objectivity in philosophy; the point
of view is the thing. I should have liked to call it "A Lyrical Philosophy",
using the word "lyrical" in the sense of being a highly personal and individual
outlook. But that would be too beautiful a name and I must forego it, for fear
of aiming too high and leading the reader to expect too much, and because the
main ingredient of my thought is matter-of-fact prose, a level easier to
maintain because more natural. Very much contented am I to lie low, to cling to
the soil, to be of kin to the sod. My soul squirms comfortably in the soil and
sand is happy. Sometimes when one is drunk with this earth, one's spirit seems
so light that he thinks he is in heaven. But actually he seldom rises six feet
above the ground.

I should have liked also to write the entire book in the form of a dialogue like
Plato's. It is such a convenient form for personal, inadvertent disclosures, for
bringing in the significant trivialities of our daily life, above all for idle
rambling about the pastures of sweet, silent thought. But somehow I have not
done so. I do not know why. A fear, perhaps, that this form of literature being
so little in vogue today, no one probably would read it, and a writer after all
wants to be read. And when I say dialogue, I do not mean answers and questions
like newspaper interviews, or those leaders chopped up into short paragraphs; I
mean really good, long, leisurely discourses extending several pages at a
stretch, with many detours, and coming back to the original point of discussion
by a short cut at the most unexpected spot,	 like a man returning home by
climbing over a hedge, to the surprise of his walking companion. Oh, how I love
to reach home by climbing over the back fence, and to travel on bypaths! At
least my companion will grant that I am familiar with the way home and with the
surrounding countryside... But I dare not.

I am not original. The ideas expressed here have been thought and expressed by
many thinkers of the East and West over and over again; those I borrow from the
East are hackneyed truths there. They are, nevertheless, my ideas; they have
become a part of my being. If they have taken root in by being, it is because
they express something original in me, and when I first encountered them, my
heart gave an instinctive assent. I like them as ideas and not because the
person who expressed them is of any account. In fact, I have traveled the
bypaths in my reading as well as in my writing. Many of the authors quoted are
names obscure and may baffle a Chinese professor of literature. If some happen
to be well known, I accept their ideas only as they compel my intuitive approval
and not because the authors are well known. It is my habit to buy cheap editions
of old, obscure books and see what I can discover there. If the professors of
literature knew the sources of my ideas, they would be astounded at the
Philistine. But there is a greater pleasure in picking up a small pearl in an
ash can than in looking at a large one in a jeweler's window.

I am not deep and not well read. If one is too well read, then one can not know
what is and what is not. I have not read Locke or Hume or Berkeley, and have not
taken a college course in philosophy. Technically speaking, my method and my
training are all wrong, because I do not read philosophy, but only read life at
first hand. That is an unconventional way of studying philosophy the incorrect
way. Some of my sources are: Mrs. Huang, an amah in my family who has all the
ideas that go into the breeding of a good woman in China; a Soochow boat woman
with her profuse use of expletives; a Shanghai street car conductor; my cook's
wife; a lion cub in the zoo; a squirrel in Central Park in New York; a deck
steward who made one good remark; that writer of a column on astronomy (dead for
some ten years now); all news in boxes; and any writer who does not kill our
sense of curiosity in life or who has not killed it in himself... how can I
enumerate them all?

Thus deprived of academic training in philosophy, I am less scared to write a
book about it. Everything seems clearer and simpler for it, if that is any
compensation in the eyes of orthodox philosophy. I doubt it. I know there will
be complaints that my words are not long enough, that I make things too easy to
understand, and finally that I lack cautiousness, that I do not whisper low and
trip with mincing steps in the sacred mansions of philosophy, looking properly
scared as I ought to do. Courage seems to be the rarest of all virtues in a
modern philosopher. But I have always wandered outside the precincts of
philosophy and that gives me courage. There is a method of appealing to one's
own intuitive, of thinking out one's own ideas and forming one's own independent
perception, and confessing them in public with a childish impudence, and sure
enough, some kindred souls in another corner of the world will agree with you. A
person forming his ideas in this manner will often be astounded to discover how
another writer said exactly the same things and felt exactly the same way, but
perhaps expressed the ideas more easily and more gracefully. It is then that he
discovers the ancient author and the ancient author bears him witness, and their
souls become forever friends.

There is therefore the matter of my obligations to these authors, especially my
Chinese soulmates. I have for my collaborators in writing this book a company of
genial souls, who I hope like me as much as I like them. For in a very real
sense, these soulmates have been with me, in the only form of spiritual
communion that I recognize as real when two men separated by the ages think the
same thoughts and sense the same feelings and each perfectly understands the
other. In the preparation of this book, a few of my friends have been especially
helpful with their contributions and advice: Po Chuyi of the eight century, Su
Tungp'o of the eleventh, and that great company of original souls of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the romantic and voluble Tu Ch'ihshui, the
playful, original Yuan Chunglang, the deep, magnificent Li Chowu, the sensitive
and sophiticated Chang Ch'ao, the epicure Li Liweng, the happy and gay old
hedonist Yuan Tsets'ai, and bubbling, joking, effervescent Chin Shengt'an,
unconventional souls all, men with so much independent perception and so much
feeling for things to be liked by the orthodox critics, men too good to be
"moral" and too moral to be "good" for the Confucianists. The smallness of the
select company has made the enjoyment of their presence all the more valued and
sincere. Some of these may happen not to be quoted, but they are here with me in
this book all the same. Their coming back to their own in China is only a matter
of time.... There have been others, names less well known, but no less welcome
for their apt remarks, because they express my sentiments so well. I call them
my Chinese Amiels, people who don't talk much, but always talk sensibly, and I
respect their good sense. There are others again who belong to the illustrious
company of "Anons" of all countries and ages, who in an inspired moment said
something wiser then they knew, like the unknown fathers of great men. Finally
there are greater ones still, whom I look up to more as masters than as
companions of the soul, whose serenity of understanding is so human and yet so
divine, and whose wisdom seems to have come entirely without effort because it
has become completely natural. Such a one is Chuangtse, and such a one is T'ao
Yuanming, whose simplicity is the despair of smaller men. I have sometimes let
these soul speak directly to the reader, making proper acknowledgment, and at
other times, I have spoken for them while I seem to be speaking for myself. The
older my friendship with them, the more likely is indebtedness to their ideas to
be of the familiar, elusive and invisibile type, like parental influence in a
good family breeding. It is impossible to put one's finger on a definite point
of resemblance. I have also shosen to speak as a modern, sharing the modern
life, and not only as a Chinese; to give only what I have personally absorbed
into my modern being, and not merely to act as a respectful translator of the
ancients. Such a procedure has its drawback, but on the whole, one can do more
sincere job of it. The selections are therefore as highly personal as the
rejections. No complete presentation of any one poet or philosopher is attempted
here, and it is  impossible to judge of them through the evidences on these
pages. I must therefore conclude by saying as usual that the merits of this
book, if any, are largely due to the helpful suggestions of my collaborators,
while for the inaccuracies, deficiencies and immaturities of judgment, I alone
am responsible.

Again I owe my thanks to Mr. and Mrs. Richard J. Walsh, first, for suggesting
the idea of the book, and secondly, for their useful frank criticism. I must
also thank Mr. Hugh Wade for cooperating on preparing the manuscript for the
press and on the proofs, and Miss Lillian Peffer for making the Index.

Lin Yutang  
New York City  
July 30, 1937

Next: [1. Approach to Life &rarr;](https://github.com/thaicuc/the-importance-of-living/blob/master/contents/01-approach-to-life.md)
