# Approach to Life

In what follows I am presenting the Chinese point of view, because I cannot
help myself. I am interested only in presenting a view of life and of
things as the best and wisest Chinese minds have seen it and expressed it
in their folk wisdom and their literature. It is an idle philosophy born of
an idle life, evolved in a different age, I am quite aware. But I cannot
help feeling that this view of life is essentially true, and since we are
alike under the skin, what touches the human heart in one country touches
all. I shall have to present a view of life as Chinese poets and scholars
evaluated it with their common sense, their realism and their sense of
poetry. I shall attempt to reveal some of the beauty of the pagan world, a
sense of the pathos and beauty and terror and comedy of life, viewed by a
people who have a strong feeling of the limitations of our existence, and
yet somehow retain a sense of the dignity of human life.

The Chinese philosopher is one who dreams with one eye open, who views life
with love and sweet irony, who mixes his cynicism with a kindly tolerance,
and who alternately wakes up from life's dream and then nods again, feeling
more alive when he is dreaming than when he is awake, thereby investing his
waking life with a dream world quality. He sees with one eye closed and
with one eye opened the futility of much that goes on around him and of his
own endeavors, but barely retains enough sense of reality to determine to
go through with it. He is seldom disillusioned because he has no illusions,
and seldom disappointed because he never had extravagant hopes. In this way
his soul is emancipated.

For, after surveying the field of Chinese literature and philosophy, I come
to the conclusion that the highest ideal of Chinese culture has always been
a man with a sense of detachment (takuan) toward life based on a sense of
wise disenchantment. From this detachment comes high mindedness
(k'uanghuai), a high mindedness which enables one to go through life with
tolerant irony and escape the temptations of fame and wealth and
achievement, and eventually makes him take what comes. And from this
detachment arise also his sense of freedom, his love of vagabondage and his
pride and nonchalance. It is only with this sense of freedom and
nonchalance that one eventually arrives at the keen and intense joy of
living.

It is useless for me to say whether my philosophy is valid or not for the
Westerner. To understand Western life, one would have to look at it as a
Westerner born, with his own temperament, his bodily attitudes and his own
set of nerves. I have no doubt that American nerves can stand a good many
things that Chinese nerves cannot stand, and vice versa. It is good that it
should be so that we should all born different. And yet it is all a
question of relativity. I am quite sure that amidst the hustle and bustle
of American life, there is a great deal of wistfulness, of the divine
desire to lie on a plot of grass under tall beautiful trees of and idle
afternoon and just do nothing. The necessity for such common cries as "Wake
up and live" is to me a good sign that a wise portion  of American humanity
prefer to dream the hours away. Perhaps the American is merely ashamed of
the word "loafing" in a world where everybody is doing something, but
somehow, as sure as I know he is also an animal, he likes sometimes to have
his muscles relaxed, to stretch on the sand, or to lie still with one leg
comfortably curled up and one arm place below his head as his pillow. If
so, he cannot be very different from Yen Huei, who had exactly that virtue
and whom Confucius desperately admired among all his disciples. The only
thing I desire to see is that he is honest about it, and that he can
proclaim to the world that he likes it when he likes it, that it is not
when he is working in the office but when he is lying idly on the sand that
his soul utters, "Life is beautiful."

We are, therefore, about to see a philosophy and art of living as the mind
of the Chinese people as a whole has understood it. I am inclined to think
that, in a good or bad sense, there is nothing like it in the world. For
here we come to an entirely new way of looking at life by an entirely
different type of mind. It is a truism to say that the culture of any
nation is the product of its mind. Consequently, where there is a national
mind so racially different and historically isolated from the Western
cultural world, we have the right to expect new answers to the problems of
life, or what is better, new methods of approach, or, still better, a new
posing of the problems themselves. We know some of the virtues and
deficiencies of that mind, at least as revealed to us in the historical
past. It has a glorious art and a contemptible science, a magnificent
common sense and an infantile logic, a fine womanish chatter about life and
so scholastic philosophy. It is generally known that the Chinese mind is an
intensely practical, hard headed one, and it is also known to some lovers
of Chinese art that it is a profoundly sensitive mind; by a still smaller
proportion of people, it is accepted as also a profoundly poetic and
philosophical mind. At least the Chinese are noted for taking things
philosophically, which is saying more than the statement that the Chinese
have a great philosophy or have a few great philosophers. For a nation to
have a few philosophers is not so unusual, but for a nation to take things
philosophically is terrific. It is evident anyway that the Chinese as a
nation are more philosophic than efficient, and that if it were otherwise,
no nation could have survived the high blood pressure of an efficient life
for four thousand years. Four thousand years of efficient living would ruin
any nation. An important consequence is that, while in the West, the insane
are so unusual that we worship them, as anybody who has a knowledge of
Chinese literature will testify. And that, after all, is what I am driving
at. Yes, the Chinese have a light, an almost gay, philosophy, and the best
proof of their philosophic temper is to be found in this wise and merry
philosophy of living.

[Next: 02 - The Scamp as Ideal &rarr;](https://github.com/thaicuc/the-importance-of-living/blob/master/contents/02-the-scamp-as-ideal.md)
