# Human Life A Poem

I think that, from a biological standpoint, human life almost reads like a poem.
I has its own rhythm and beat, its internal cycles of growth and decay. It
begins with innocent childhood, followed by awkward adolescence trying awkwardly
to adapt itself to mature society, with its young passions and follies, its
ideals and ambitions; then it reaches a manhood of intense activities, profiting
from experience and learning more about society and human nature; at middle age,
there is a slight easing of tension, a mellowing of character like the ripening
of fruit or the mellowing of good wine, and the gradual acquiring of a more
tolerant, more cynical and at the same time a kindlier view of life; then in the
sunset of our life, the endocrine glands decrease their activity, and if we have
a true philosophy of old age and have ordered our life pattern according to it,
it is for us the age of peace and security and leisure and contentment; finally,
life flickers out and one gone into eternal sleep, never to wake up again. One
should be able to sense the beauty of this rhythm of life, to appreciate, as we
do in grand symphonics, its main theme, its strains of conflict and the final
resolution. The movements of these cycles are very much the same in a normal
life, but the music must be provided by the individual himself. In some souls,
the discordant note becomes harsher and harsher and finally overwhelms or
submerges the main melody. Sometimes the discordant note gains so much power
that the music can no longer go on, and the individual shoots himself with a
pistol or jumps into a river. But that is because his original ***leit-motif***
has been hopelessly over-shadowed through the lack of a good self-education.
Otherwise the normal human life runs to its normal end in a kind of dignified
movement and procession. There are sometimes in many of us too many staccatos or
***impetuosos***, and because the tempo is wrong, the music is not pleasing to
the ear; we might have more of the grand rhythm and majestic tempo of the
Ganges, flowing slowly and eternally into the sea.

No one can say that a life with childhood, manhood and old age is not a
beautiful arrangement; the day has its morning, noon and sunset, and the year
has its reasons, and it is good that it is so. There is no good or bad in life,
except what is good according to its own season. And if we take this biological
view of life and try to live according to the seasons, no one but a conceited
fool or an impossible idealist can deny that human life can be lived like a
poem. Shakespeare has expressed this idea more graphically in his passage about
the seven stages of life, and a good many Chinese writers have said about the
same thing. It is curious that Shakespeare was never very religious, or very
much concerned with religion. I think this was his greatness; he took human life
largely as it was, and intruded himself as little upon the general scheme of
things as he did upon the characters of his plays. Shakespeare was like Nature
herself, and that is the greatest compliment we can pay to a writer or thinker.
He merely lived, observed life and went away.

[Next: 7 - The Monkey Epic &rarr;](https://github.com/thaicuc/the-importance-of-living/blob/master/contents/07-the-monkey-epic.md)
