# On Having A Mind

The human mind, you say, is probably the noblest product of the Creation. This
is a proposition that most people will admit, particularly when it refers to a
mind like Albert Einstein's that can prove curved space by a long mathematical
equation, or Edison's that can invent the gramaphone and the motion picture, or
the mind of other physicists who can measure the rays of an advancing or
receding star or deal with the constitution of the unseen atoms, or that of the
inventor of natural-color movic cameras. Compared with the aimless, shifting and
fumbling curiosity of the monkeys, we must agree that we have a noble, a
glorious intellect.

The average mind, however, is charming rather than noble. Had the average mind
been noble, we should be completely rational beings without sins or weaknesses
or misconduct, and what an insipid world that would be! We should be so much
less charming as creatures. I am such a humanist that saints without sins don't
interest me. But we are charming in our irrationality, our inconsistencies, our
follies, our sprees and holiday gaieties, our prejudices, bigotry and
forgetfulness. Had we all perfect brains, we shouldn't have to make new
resolutions every New Year. The beauty of the human life consists in the fact
that, as we review on New Year's Eve our last New Year resolutions, we find we
have fulfilled a third of them, left unfulfilled another third, and can't
remember what the other third was. A plan that is sure to be carried out down to
its last detail already loses interest for me. A general who goes to battle and
is completely sure of his victory beforehand, and can even predict the exact
number of casualties, will lose all interest in the battle, and might just as
well throw up the whole thing. No one would play chess if he knew his opponent's
mind good, bad, or indifferent, was infallible. All novels would be unreadable
did we know exactly how the mind of each character was going to work and were we
able consequently to predict the exact outcome. The reading of a novel is but
the chase of a wayward and unpredictable mind making its incalculable decisions
at certain moments, through a maze of evolving circumstances. A stern,
unforgiving father who does not at some moment relax cease to impress us as
human, and even a faithless husband who is forever faithless soon forfeits the
reader's interest. Imagine a renowned, proud composer, whom no one could induce
to compose an opera for a certain beautiful woman, but who, on hearing that a
hated rival composer is thinking of doing it, immediately snatches at the job;
or a scientist who in his life has consistently refused to publish his writings
in newspapers, but who, on seeing a rival scientist make a slip with one single
letter, forgets his own rule and rushes into print. There we have laid our
finger upon the singularly human quality of the mind.

The human mind is charming in its unreasonableness, its inveterate prejudices,
and its waywardness and unpredictability. If we haven't learned this truth, we
have learned nothing from the century of study of human psychology. In other
words, our minds still retain the aimless, fumbling quality of sumian
intelligence.

Consider the evolution of the human mind. Our mind was originally an organ for
sensing danger and preserving life. That this mind eventually came to appreciate
logic and a correct mathematical equation I consider a mere accident. Certainly
it was not created for that purpose. It was created for sniffing food, and if
after sniffing food, it can also sniff an abstract mathematical formula, that's
all to the good. My conception of the human brain, as of all animal brains, is
that it is like an octopus or a starfish with tentacles, tentacles for feeling
the truth and eating it. Today we still speak of "feeling" the truth, rather
than "thinking" it. The brain, together with other sensory organs, constitutes
the feelers. How its tentacles feel the truth is still as great a mystery in
physics as the sensitivity to light of the purple in the eye's retina. Every
time the brain dissociates itself from the collaborating sensory apparatus and
indulges in so-called "abstract thinking", every time it gets away from what
William James calls the perceptual reality and escapes into the world of
conceptual reality, it becomes devitalized, dehumanized, and degenerate. We all
labor under the misconception that the true function of the mind is thinking, a
misconception that is bound to lead to serious mistakes in philosophy unless we
revise our notion of the term "thinking" itself. It is a misconception that is
apt to leave the philosopher disillusioned when he goes out of his studio and
watches the crowd at the market. As if thinking had much to do with our everyday
behavior!

The late James Harvey Robinson has tried to show, in The Mind in the Making, how
our mind gradually evolved from, and is still operating upon, four underlying
layers: the animal mind, the savage mind, the childish mind, and the traditional
civilized mind, and has further shown us the necessity of developing a more
critical mind if the present human civilization is to continue. In my scientific
moment, I am inclined to agree with him, but in my wiser moments, I doubt the
feasibility, or even the desirability, of such a step of general progress. I
prefer to have our mind charmingly unreasonable as it is at present. I should
hate to see a world in which we are all perfectly rational beings. Do I distrust
scientific progress? No, I distrust sainthood. Am I anti-intellectualistic?
Perhaps yes; perhaps no. I am merely in love with life, and being in love with
life, I distrust the intellect profoundly. Imagine a world in which every one is
so omniscient that no house ever catches fire, no king abdicates his throne for
love, no man changes his mind and everyone proceeds to carry out with logical
precision a career that he mapped out for himself at the age of ten. Good-bye to
this world! All the excitement and uncertainty of life would be gone. There
would be no literature because there would be no sin, no misbehavior, no human
weakness, no upsetting passion, no prejudices, no irregularities and, worst of
all, no surprises. It would be like a horse race in which every one of the forty
or fifty thousand spectators knew the winner. Human fallibility is the very
essence of the color of life, as the upsets are the very color and interest of a
steeplechase. Imagine a Doctor Johnston without his bigoted prejudices! If we
were all completely rational beings, we should then, instead of growing into
perfect wisdom, degenerate into automatons, the human mind serving merely to
register certain impulses as unfailingly as a gas meter. That would be inhuman,
and anything inhuman is boring.

My readers may suspect that I am trying a desperate defense of human frailties
and making virtues of their vices, and yet it is not so. What we gained in
correctness of conduct through the development of a completely rational mind, we
should lose in the fun and color of life. And nothing is so uninteresting as to
spend one's life with a paragon of virtue as a husband or wife. I have no doubt
that a society of such perfectly rational beings would be perfectly fitted to
survive, and yet I wonder whether survival on such terms is worth having. Have a
society that is well-ordered, by all means but not too well-ordered! I recall
the ants, who, to my mind, are probably the most perfectly rational creatures on
earth. No doubt ants have evolved such a perfect socialist state that they have
been able to live on this pattern for probably the last million years. So far as
complete rationality of conduct is concerned, I think we have to hand it to the
ants, and let human beings some second (I doubt very much whether they deserve
that). The ants are a hard-working, sane, saving, and thrifty lot. They are the
socially regimented and individually disciplined beings that we are not. They
don't mind working fourteen hours a day for the state or the community; they
have a sense of duty and almost no sense of compassion; they persistence, order,
courtesy, courage, and above all, self-discipline. We are poor specimens of
self-discipline, not even good enough for museum pieces.

Run across any hall of honor, with statues of the great men of history lining
the corridor, and you will perceive that rationality of conduct is probably the
last thing to be recalled from their lives. This Julius Caesar, who fell in love
with Cleopatra, noble Julius Caesar, who was so completely irrational that he
almost forgot an empire for a woman. That Moses, who in a fit of rage shattered
the sacred stone tablets which had taken him forty days on Mount Sinai to
inscribe in company with God, and in that he was no more rational than the
Israelites who forsook God and took to worshiping the Golden Calf during his
absence. That King David, who was alternately cruel and generous, alternately
religious and impious, who worshiped God and sinned and wrote psalms of
repentance and worshiped God again. King Solomon, the very image of wisdom, who
couldn't do a thing about his son. Confucius, who told a visitor he was not at
home and then, as the visitor was just outside the door, sang upstairs in order
to let him know that he was at home. Jesus, with his tears at Gethsemane and his
doubts on the cross. Shakespeare, who bequeathed his "second-best bed" to his
wife. Milton, who couldn't get along with his seventeen-year-old wife and
therefore wrote a treatise on divorce and, being attacked, them burst forth into
a defense of the liberty of speech in Areopagitica. Goethe, who went through the
Church's wedding ceremony with his wife, their nineteen-year-old son standing by
their side. Jonathan Swift, Stella, Ibsen, Emilie Bardach (he kept rational,
good for him) ...

Is it not plain that passion rather than reason rules the world? And that what
made these great men lovable, what made them human, was not their rationality,
but their lack of rationality? Chinese obituary notices and biographical
sketches of men and women written by their children are so unreadable, so
uninteresting and so untrue, because they make all their ancestors appear
abnormally and wholly virtuous beings. The great criticism of my book on China
by my countrymen is that I make the Chinese too human, that I have painted their
weaknesses as well as their strength. My countrymen (at least the little
bureaucrats) believe that if I had painted China as a paradise inhabited by
Confucianist saints only, living in a millennium of peace and reason, I could
have done more effective propaganda for my country! There is really no limit to
the stupidity of bureaucrats. But the very charm of biography, its very
readability, depends on showing the human side of a great character which is so
similar to ours. Every touch of irrational behavior in a biography is a stroke
in convincing reality. On that alone, the success of Lytton Strachey's portraits
depends.

An excellent illustration of a perfectly sound mind is provided by the English.
The English have got bad logic, but very good tentacles in their brains for
sensing danger and preserving life. I have not been able to discover anything
logical in their national behavior or their rational history. Their
universities, their constitution, their Anglican Church are all pieces of
patchwork, being the steady accretions of a process of historical growth. The
very strength of the British Empire consists in the English lack of celebration,
in their total inability to see other man's point of view, and in their strong
conviction that the English way is the only right way and English food is the
only good food. The moment the English men learn to reason and lose their strong
confidence in themselves, the British Empire will collapse. For no one can go
about conquering the world if he has doubts about himself. You can make
absolutely nothing out of the English attitude toward their king, a king who is
deprived by them of the liberty of speech and is summarily told to behave or
quit the throne. When Elizabethan England needed pirates to protect the Empire,
she was able to produce enough pirates to meet the situation and glorified them.
In every period, England was able to fight the right war, against the right
enemy, with the right ally, on the right side, at the right time, and call it by
a wrong name. They didn't do it by logic, did they? They did it by their
tentacles.

The English have a ruddy complexion, developed no doubt by the London fog and by
cricket. A skin that is so healthy cannot but help playing an important part in
their thinking, that is, in the process of feeling their way through life. And
as the English think with their healthy skin, so the Chinese think with their
profound intestines. That is a pretty generally established matter in China. We
Chinese know that we do think with our intestines; scholars are said to have "a
bellyful of ideas", or of poetry and literature, "a bellyful of sorrow", "of
anger", "remorse", "chagrin", or "longing". Chinese lovers separated from each
other write letters to say that "Their sorrowful intestines are tied into a
hundred knots", or that at their last parting "Their intestines were broken".
Chinese scholars who have arranged their ideas for an essay or a speech, but
have not written them down on paper, are said to have their "belly manuscript"
ready. They have got their ideas all arranged down there. I'm quite sure they
have. This is, of course, all strictly scientific and capable of proof,
especially when modern psychologists come to understand better the emotional
quality and texture of our thought. But the Chinese don't need any scientific
proof. They just feel it down there. Only by appreciating the fact that the
emotional quality of Chinese melodies all starts from below the diaphragm of the
singers, can one understand Chinese music with its profound emotional color.

One must never deprecate the capability of the human intellect when dealing with
logical problems or anything except human relationships. Optimistic about the
conquests of science, I am less hopeful about the general development of a
critical mind in dealing with human affairs, or about mankind reaching a calm
and understanding far above the sway of passions. Mankind as individuals may
have reached austere heights, but mankind as social groups are still subject to
primitive passions, occasional back-slidings and outcroppings of the savage
instincts, and occasional waves of fanaticism and mass hysteria.

The critical mind is too thin and cold, thinking itself will help little and
reason will be of small avail; only the spirit of reasonableness, a sort of
warm, glowing, emotional and intuitive thinking, joined with compassion, will
insure us against a reversion to our ancestral type. Only the development of our
life to bring it into harmony with our instincts can save us. I consider the
education of our senses, our intuition, and our heart rather more important than
the education of our intellect.

[Next: 11 - Find Thyself: Chuangtse &rarr;](https://github.com/thaicuc/the-importance-of-living/blob/master/contents/11-find-thyself-chuangtse.md)
